I'm going to go into another question as
well where it was asking about my model
of periodization so my model of
periodization is not really my model at
all it's just a different interpretation
of the definition okay a lot of the
definitions of periodization from the
highest level academics basically
explain the same thing with different
words okay so there's a book called
periodization by chuda bmper and his
long-term plan is split up into three
phases first phase being accumulation
second phase being trans mutation third
phase being realization so what does
that mean okay so let's explain it my
phases I'll do the same thing it's the
same process but I I split it up into
five phases where accumulation being the
first phase I start with movement
literacy so motor learning being the
first phase now that first phase means
learning how to move understanding the
right techniques that you're going to be
performing as a very beginner that's
quite simple as a more intermediate to
advanc Tool Elite you're not really
doing the same thing and we can kind of
ditch that phase we're always learning
technique no matter who you are you're
always trying to refine technique but
that specific phase of motor learning is
something that I hold only for absolute
beginners you walk into the gym you kind
of want to learn the basic fundamental
movement patterns I break it down into
four groups squat Bend Push Pull okay
and and we just learn how to move now
we're not going to perfect those
movements we never do we never truly
Master those movements we're always
trying to refine but we want to get that
to a certain point so that we can move
on to the next phase so what do I mean
by that when you're a baby and you're
learning how to walk you got to crawl
first and do all these things you don't
perfect walking as a baby before you
start running you just slowly slowly get
better at it but you get good enough at
crawling to be able to walk get good
enough at walking to be able to run no
one's ever the best at it except for you
say Vault but it doesn't mean we can't
progress so that first phase that I have
is unique to the absolute beginners and
and then this is where most of the
sports periodization models are pretty
much the same and that is accumulation
means accumulating what typically
accumulating volume so the first phases
of a long-term plan is higher reps
higher total sets more work so that we
can do a lot of things like one build
work capacity okay what does build work
capacity mean what if you're a
powerlifter why do I need work capacity
my powerlifting sport is only a one rep
max for each of these you know the squat
bench press and deadlift why do I need
work capacity well we need work capacity
to build other physical qualities that
one rep max lifting just cannot achieve
such as muscle hypertrophy the larger
the muscle the greater the potential for
strength output you cannot build great
amount of muscle if all you're doing is
one rep max lifting it can produce some
hypertrophy but you typically don't see
the best bodybuilders in the world
training with one rep Maxes I know you
have seen some like Ronnie Colman doing
his lightweight baby however that's out
of enjoyment and that's not the reason
why he's as big and muscular and
successful as what he is that's why he
included those exercises because he
loved doing it but the main reason he
was so big in muscular is because of the
copious amounts of volume that he would
perform over you know Decades of him
training and nutrition and
supplementation and all of those amazing
things but accumulation so even though
your goal is to just do a one rep max in
your sport you need to build work
capacity to handle the demands of the
other phases so that we can eventually
optimize my one rep max training okay so
the way that I break that up is learn to
move as the first phase so it's five
phases learn to move the second phase is
building work capacity that's where we
gradually introduce more volume to the
individual so that doesn't mean we're at
our highest amount of volume it means
we're gradually increasing our volume so
that we can have better work capacity
for our next phases so I talk about work
capacity but I also want to teach an
indiv idual how to improve their pain
tolerance what does that mean it doesn't
mean I'm referring to injuries I'm
referring to the pain that you feel from
the amount of effort you need to put in
to build muscle okay so building muscle
requires a high amount of effort for
your training okay so a lot of the times
we talk about training close to fail is
the most effective way or training close
to or to fail is the most effective way
to build muscle it's true okay so
training close to fail for an absolute
beginner looks very different to
training close to fail for an advanced
athlete if you look at the best
bodybuilders or power lifters or or all
those high level barbell sport athletes
going to fail there's a lot of pain in
their face there's a lot of
discoloration funny noises coming out of
their mouths a lot of sweat and all that
stuff if you have a look at an absolute
beginner going to fail they're typically
smiling and maybe laughing out of
embarrassment but the reason they fail
isn't because they've achieved true
muscle failure they may have failed
because they lack the coordination to
complete more reps but it's not painful
for those individuals in general they're
not lifting heavy enough okay so so
training to fail for hypertrophy is very
different training to fail for a
beginner I don't recommend training to
fail for a beginner training to fail as
a hypertrophy athlete hurts so a lot of
the you know intermediate and advanced
and anyone who's trained to build muscle
you will understand that it's hard work
when I say hurts I don't mean injury
pain okay I mean get under a set of
squats you know to a true 8 to 10 RM
damn that hurts if you're lifting heavy
enough if you're you know if you're
Advanced enough or leg press go and set
it do a set of 20 or 30 on a set of leg
press where you're working to fail damn
that hurts that makes funny noises come
out of your mouth but if you're an
absolute beginner that's not happening
all right so building work capacity is
also so that's the the the next phase
after learning how to move building work
capacity but also building tolerance to
pain improving your pain tolerance is
the next phase before we then go on to
our muscle building phase so this is all
part of what's considered accumulation
building work capacity and then
hypertrophy is accumulation what's some
of the key factors for good hypertrophy
training is high volume typically not as
high volume as you can CrossFit perform
a lot higher volume than a lot of other
athletes yet they're not the biggest
okay so it's not just volume it's the
right amount of volume and the right
amount of effort and the right amount of
nutrition okay so this is all part of
the accumulation phase then we have
transmutation phase the transmutation
phase I say that's kind of like
partially hypertrophy and also partially
strength which is where we start to turn
our muscle that we've built into very
strong muscle okay so the rep ranges
that we typically use to build muscle is
is typically a lot higher than strength
building phases strength building phases
we could say 1 to six rep range for
building strength that's not the best
for building muscle even though
technically you can a lot of the best
bodybuilders in the world are using rep
ranges between kind of six reps to you
know up to 20 reps or even 30 reps
depending on the exercise but a lot of
the times we talk about 6 to 12 rep
range optimal fper tropy which I agree
with some of you might be thinking but
there's research that say 5 to 30 reps
there's a study that says this yes I
agree but what is optimal for a lot of
the main movements a lot of times you
see the best bodybuilders in the world
using around 6 to 12 rep range on those
big compound movements that's a kind of
sweet spot okay but that's typically not
the rep range or the feeling that you're
going to get when you're really training
for strength so then we move move to the
strength so the transmutation phase is
changing from accumulation to strength
so building muscle building work
capacity now we're turning that that
pain tolerance that work capacity that
big muscle that we built into strong
muscle so then we start lifting heavier
weight so strength training we need to
lift heavier weights real simple how
heavy well the fact is it depends on the
sport that we're playing so if you're a
powerlifter obviously you need to learn
how to do a one rep max if you're a
rugby player you Ty Ty Ally don't need
to do one rep max in fact I would argue
and say one to three rep range is not
really the best at building strength
that's the best for practicing the skill
of strength which is what we use in the
following phases but if your objective
is to purely build strength I say in my
opinion 3 to six rep range is probably
the best for building strength now
here's the thing if you just come in as
a beginner and go straight to the
strength phase you're limiting yourself
we know that the larger the muscle the
larger the cross-sectional area of the
muscle the greater the potential for
strength so that means if you have two
athletes one athlete does a whole big
phase of building work capacity and
building muscle mass and then they build
strength over let's just say an 8 to 12
week Block versus another athlete that
just does that 3 to six rep range
typically you'll find the person who did
the work capacity in the muscle building
phase first before they did the strength
phase will achieve a greater result in
strength over the long term than the
lifter that just came in and
specifically trained for strength okay
because the lifter that came just
specifically trained for strength didn't
work on work capacity didn't build
muscle so their muscles aren't as big
before they move onto their strength
phase which is why our favorite coaches
and scientists has figured out instead
of just doing specificity the whole time
there's other physical qualities that we
can't attain through training for Pure
specificity so pure specificity for a
powerlifter does not get you very big
okay so then after we've done a strength
phase when it comes to powerlifting
competition that's when after the
strength building phase we would want to
Peak so the peaking phase a few
characteristics of the peaking phase is
this is the highest amount of
specificity of all the phases so power
lift out you really want to be doing
squats and benches and deadlifts and
that's the main volume of the entire
block squats benches and deadlifts and a
lot of the other accessory exercises May
contribute to fatigue so typically we
would pull a lot of those out and we
would typically use a lot less volume
overall so that we can be less fatigued
because a lot of the high volume
training programs accumulate and they
contribute to fatigue so that's what we
want to do when we're peing for a
competition this is a huge
characteristic of peaking is we want to
be as recovered as possible and as
strong as possible and as skilled as
possible now one of the questions was
how does that differ if your goal is
purely hypertrophy okay what if you're
training clients that don't care about
top end strength well then my answer to
that is don't do that final Peak phase
just as I said that hypertrophy training
has a huge carryover to getting to
reaching a higher potential of strength
building strength also has a huge
carryover to building muscle okay so
this is something that a lot of our top
scientists when it comes to hypertrophy
will talk about people like Dr Brad
shonfeld talks a lot about phase
potentiation what does that mean it mean
potentiate means to make better so he
talks about two types of athlete you get
one group of athlete that does eight
weeks of pure hypertrophy and another
group that does 4 weeks of strength
before 4 weeks of hypertrophy the group
that did the strength phase first
achieve a better result in hypertrophy
so the question was what if your goal is
purely hypertrophy I would do the same
thing learn to move build work capacity
that's what everyone should be doing
when they first start their training
then from the build work capacity then
we start building muscle then we turn
that big muscle that we built into
strong muscle so we go to our strength
phase if my goal is purely hypertrophy
then I would use a a style of
periodization that's known as undulating
programming so monthly undulating
programming means I would undulate or
swap between muscle building High Reps
to strength building low reps and heavy
weight and I'd swap between those two
phases all year round so I'd go build
muscle with High Reps build strength
with low reps and heavy weight and then
back to hypertrophy then back to
strength then back to hypertrophy then
back to strength and I could do that all
year round that's how I would change my
long-term periodization strategy if your
goal was purely hypertrophy